---
tip: 53
title: Tagged Data Payload
description: Block payload for arbitrary data
author: Philipp Gackstatter (@PhilippGackstatter) <philipp.gackstatter@iota.org>
discussions-to: https://github.com/iotaledger/tips/pull/156
status: Draft
type: Standards
layer: Core
created: 2023-11-02
replaces: 23
---

# Summary

This TIP is a slightly revised version of TIP-23 with updates to IOTA 2.0, like the the type prefix of the _Tagged Data_
Payload type and its syntactic validation. The payload concept offers a very flexible way to combine and encapsulate
information in the IOTA protocol. This document proposes a basic payload type that allows the addition of arbitrary
data.

# Motivation

The most flexible way to extend an existing object is by the addition of arbitrary data. This payload provides a way to
do just that. An optional tag can be used to categorize the data.

# Specification

## Tagged Data

The following table describes the serialization of a _Tagged Data Payload_ following the notation from
[TIP-21](../TIP-0021/tip-0021.md):

<details>
  <summary>Tagged Data</summary>
  <blockquote>Optional Data with an optional Tag.</blockquote>
</details>
<table>
  <tr>
    <td>
      <b>Name</b>
    </td>
    <td>
      <b>Type</b>
    </td>
    <td>
      <b>Description</b>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Payload Type</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>Set to <strong>value 0</strong> to denote a <i>Tagged Data Payload</i>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Tag</td>
    <td>(uint8)ByteArray</td>
    <td>The tag of the data.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Data</td>
    <td>(uint32)ByteArray</td>
    <td>Binary data.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

It is important to note that `Tag` is not considered by the protocol, it just serves as a marker for second layer
applications.

## Syntactic Validation

- The length `Len` of the `Tag` field must satisfy: `0 <= Len <= 64`.
- The length `Len` of the `Data` field must satisfy: `0 <= Len <= 8192`.

# Rationale

As the tag is not considered by the protocol, it could also be removed completely. However, Legacy IOTA and Chrysalis
supported sending of arbitrary data indexed with a tag. Thus, in order to simplify the migration of second layer
applications using these protocols, the optional `Tag` has been added which can be used in a similar manner.

# Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
