---
tip: 33
title: IOTA Public Token Registry
description: Defines an open public registry for iNFT policy ID and Native Tokens 
author: Adam Eunson (@AdamCroply) <adam@tanglelabs.io>, Merul Dhiman (@coodos) <merul@tanglelabs.io>
discussions-to: https://github.com/iotaledger/tips/discussions/59
status: Draft
type: Standards
layer: Interface
created: 2022-04-05
---


# IOTA Public Token Registry


## Abstract


The IOTA Public Token Registry is an open registry system built to maintain security and consistency through a **publicly maintained collection** of registered **iNFT Policy IDs** and **Native Token Names and Tickers** as defined by the standards of: 
- **[TIP-27 - IOTA NFT Standards IRC27](https://github.com/iotaledger/tips/pull/65)** 
- **[TIP-30 - Native Token Metadata Standard](https://github.com/iotaledger/tips/pull/68)** 

Providing the facility to support referenceable records that can provide universal verification of the authenticity and origins of NFTs and Tokens deployed on the IOTA Network.


### Introduction

This document aims to support a universal system that can provide dApp developers and creators with an interoperable platform to verify and register tokens providing ease-of-adoption through visible trust in token and NFT origins following recommended standards.

An open-source and publicly maintained registry, the system provides a portal for projects to register their tokens to maintain a publicly accessible reference for dApp providers and users to validate official project tokens.

The registry comprises of:
- **iNFT Policy Registry** to allow open-source verifiable collection details
- **IOTA Native Token Registry** to allow open-source verifiable token details
- **REST API** to allow easy integrations into dApps
- **Registry Front-End** to provide an accessible registry search that can be added to any application
- **GitHub PR Bot** to provide easily accessible registry applications

Utilising the schema from **IRC27 Standards for iNFTs** and **IRC30 Standards for IOTA Native Tokens**, supported with easily deployable end-points and APIs, the registry provides an accessible integration to build trust and security within the IOTA tokenisation ecosystem.


## Motivation


### Why a Public Registry?

With an expanding decentralised ecosystem the number of tokens, digital assets, and NFT collections will grow at an extremely high rate. Keeping track of authentic sources is a continued struggle, with opportunists often building out potentially malicious clone tokens and NFT collections in order to take advantage of purchasers through deceptive means.

A universal registry built not only for managing Native Tokens, but also for the management of verified NFT Policy IDs, provides an open-source point of trust and validation, that can enable creators and users to easily verify the authenticity of a project's token or assets through a simple API call or live reference on the public registry.

This document we will present the deployment and maintenance of the **IOTA Public Token Registry**.


## Specification

### The Registry

An open source registry with files containing JSON(s) for registered native tokens and NFT collections that can support project creators in opening a Pull Request to add their token to the registry.

The registry repository will follow the below folder structure whereby users can submit a JSON file with their project schema and wait for it to be approved by the committee of verifiers.


```
   repository 
       |
       |__ tokens 
       |     |__ sample-token-project-1.json
       |     |__ sample-token-project-2.json
       |
       |-- NFTs
             |__ sample-nft-project-1.json
             |__ sample-nft-project-2.json
```

The registry will be moderated and maintained by a Committee of Human validators whose approval is needed before anything get's merged. The Committee itself will be a operated via a DAO, the DAO will control who get's to be a part of the approval committee and members can be removed or added by the DAO.

A minimum threshold of the number of approvals needed before the merge will be determined by the Registry DAO.

A lot of the most common checks will be extracted to CI such as
- Checking if a name of the project is already taken 
- Raise a warning if the name is too similar to an already approved project
- make sure that the project's policy ID is listed on their website
    


### IRC27 NFT PolicyID Registry

An open-source human identifiable registry of UTXO `policyId`s to allow projects the ability to support API integrations within their dApps and websites that can support the connection of human identifiable names to verified `policyId`s.

A creator should register their `policyId` UTXO to a human identifiable value (`policyName`) as a defined unique and verified collection.

Reference to their `policyId` should be publicly visible on an **official website** or **social media page**.

A `policyName` must be a unique string.

The policy registry takes some inspiration from the [CNFT Policy IDs Repo](https://github.com/Cardano-NFTs/policyIDs) whereby a collection creator can open a pull request with their socials, policy ID and collection name and a committe of human verifiers will approve or reject the collection. 

Before a merge to the registry there must be at least 5 approving reviews by human validators. And CI checks to ensure that the socials contain the `policyId` and the `policyName` and there are no duplicate records within the registry.

An additional cautionary CI check that raises a warning for potentially malicious entries to monitor `policyName`s will also provide additional support for verifiers maintaining the repository. For example, a potential malicious entry of "TanglleLabs" when "Tangle Labs" is already a part of the registry. The rationale behind this is to mitigate fake collections or copy-cat tokens from popping up to take opportune advantage of other projects IP through deceptive means.

The Committe of human validators will be managed and compensated with a DAO infratructure where we can setup multisig requirements for any vote to conclude.

An API to support the integration of the policy registry into dApps can be called from the open-source repository.

When submitting an entry to the iNFT registry the required keys, as defined by the standard schema in TIP 27, must be included and structured as outlined in the example below.

- `issuerId` must be the original issuerId UTXO string
- `policyId` must be the unique UTXO string of the policyNFT
- `policyName` must be a unique human identifiable string
- `websiteUrl` must be an official website or social media page url that illustrates publicly the `policyId`

#### EXAMPLE

```json
{
  "registration": {
    "issuerId": " iota1qrhacyfwlcnzkvzteumekfkrrwks98mpdm37cj4xx3drvmjvnep6xqgyzyx",
    "policyId": "iota1ppk6m4x7m2t6k5pvgs0yd2nqelfaz09ueyyv6fwn",
    "policyName": "My iNFT Collection",
    "websiteUrl": "https://mywebsite.com/policyid"
  }
}
```

### IRC30 Native Token Registry

An open-source human identifiable registry of Native Token Metadata to allow individuals the ability to support API integrations into dApps and websites that allows the connection of human identifiable names to Native Tokens.


The metadata of registry entries must follow the schema standards outlined in TIP 30 as referenced by the examples below.

#### EXAMPLES

#### 1. A minimum valid token metadata JSON

```json
{
  "name": "FooCoin",
  "symbol": "FOO",
  "decimals": 3,
}
```

#### 2. A more descriptive valid token metadata JSON

```json
{
  "name": "FooCoin",
  "description": "FooCoin is the utility and governance token of FooLand, a revolutionary protocol in the play-to-earn crypto gaming field.",
  "symbol": "FOO",
  "decimals": 3,
  "url": "https://foocoin.io",
  "logoUrl": "https://ipfs.io/ipfs/QmR36VFfo1hH2RAwVs4zVJ5btkopGip5cW7ydY4jUQBrkR"
}
```




### Public Registry Front-End and API

A REST API is included in the registry to provide easy access for applications to lookup projects through a HTTP request instead of having to scour through the files manually on github.

A front-end web application is also included to provide simple search functionality to allow users to easily verify a collection or token and to provide an easily accessible option to open a PR through a web form that will extract input data and open a PR in the community Github repository on the user's behalf utilising a custom bot development.

## Rationale

The primary reason for the implementation of a token registry is to support human identifiable verification and ease of interoperability between applications handling NFTs and native tokens. Presenting increased trust and security in the tokenised aspects of the IOTA ecosystem.

Without such a store of registered project tokens an environment without a single source of easy verification would lead to an easy ecosystem for fraudsters to attack with false tokens and fake collections. that would worsen user experience and instill doubt from buyers which can hinder the expansion of the acosystem.

This registry also supports expansion, backwards compatibility, and a universal guideline for the ecosystem to develop with. Allowing an immediate interoperable environment that can support ease-of-adoption in the early stages of iNFTs and Native Tokens, whilst continually supporting feature expansion and future development.


## Backwards Compatibility


### Versioning

Expanding use-cases in the NFT and Native Token spaces will present multiple needs for different registry requirements over time. Alterations and updates will be presented to support an evolving technology and future developments.

Version is introduced from the start to allow dApp developers and creators to maintain backwards compatibility with differing versions of the registry, APIs and components.

The version is defined by the version number used preceded with the letter v, current version:

- `v1.0`

Current version `v1.0`


### Modular Structure Expansion

A modular structure to the registry has been created to support use case expansion, asset extension, alernative asset registries, or any additional requirements. Allowing creators to utilise individual registry implementations as well as the more expanded options.


## Copyright


Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
