---
tip: 46
title: Tangle Block for IOTA 2.0
description: The Block for IOTA 2.0 and validation block type
author: TODO
discussions-to: TODO
status: Draft
type: Standards
layer: Core
replaces: 24
created: 2023-05-16
---

# Table of Contents

- [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Building Blocks](#building-blocks)
  - [Block ID](#block-id)
  - [Work Score](#work-score)
  - [Time](#time)
    - [Slot Index](#slot-index)
    - [Epoch Index](#epoch-index)
  - [Slot Commitment](#slot-commitment)
    - [Slot Commitment ID](#slot-commitment-id)
    - [Semantic Validation](#semantic-validation)
  - [Signature](#signature)
- [Blocks](#blocks)
  - [Block Wrapper](#block-wrapper)
  - [Work Score](#work-score-2)
  - [Basic Block](#basic-block)
    - [Serialized Layout](#serialized-layout)
    - [Syntactic validation](#syntactic-validation)
    - [Semantic Validation](#semantic-validation-1)
    - [Payloads](#payloads)
    - [Work Score](#work-score-3)
  - [Validation Block](#validation-block)
    - [Serialized Layout](#serialized-layout-1)
    - [Syntactic validation](#syntactic-validation-1)
    - [Semantic Validation](#semantic-validation-2)
    - [Work Score](#work-score-4)
- [Rationale and alternatives](#rationale-and-alternatives)
- [Appendix](#appendix)
  - [Test Vectors](#test-vectors)
- [Copyright](#copyright)

# Summary

The Tangle is the graph data structure behind IOTA. For the Stardust upgrade an additional abstraction layer on top of
legacy IOTA version transactions was introduced where the vertices are generalized _blocks_, which then contain the
transactions or other structures that are processed by the IOTA protocol. Just as before, each block directly approves
other blocks, which are known as _parents_. The new block structure matches the requirements introduced by the IOTA 2.0
version of the protocol. A new type of block is introduced, the _Validation Block_. It is a special type of block that
is used by validators. Validation Blocks have additional functionality and different fields and validation rules. To
better distinguish the _Validation Block_ from the previously introduced _Block_, the latter is renamed to _Basic
Block_. A _Basic Block_ can contain different types of payloads which are processed by all nodes as part of the IOTA
protocol. Some payloads may have other nested payloads embedded inside. Hence, parsing is done layer by layer.

# Motivation

To better understand this layered design, consider the Internet Protocol (IP), for example: There is an Ethernet frame
that contains an IP payload. This in turn contains a TCP packet that encapsulates an HTTP payload. Each layer has a
certain responsibility and once this responsibility is completed, we move on to the next layer.

The same is true with how blocks are parsed. The outer layer of the block enables the mapping of the block to a vertex
in the Tangle and allows us to perform some basic validation. The next layer may be a transaction that mutates the
ledger state, and one layer further may provide some extra functionality on the transactions to be used by applications.

By making it possible to add and exchange payloads, an architecture is being created that can easily be extended to
accommodate future needs.

# Building Blocks

This section describes common building blocks used across multiple block types.

## Data Types & Subschema Notation

Data types and subschemas used throughout this TIP are defined in [TIP-21](../TIP-0021/tip-0021.md).

## BLAKE2b Hash Function

This TIP uses the [BLAKE2b-256](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7693) hash function.

## Ed25519 Signature Scheme

This TIP uses Ed25519 signatures according to [RFC 8032](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8032).

## Block ID

A Block ID denotes an identifier of a block, with type `ByteArray[40]`. It is created from three separately spelled out
fields due to commitment proof requirements to keep attestation proofs lightweight. It is calculated with the following
steps:

- Let `Block Header Hash` be the BLAKE2b-256 hash over the serialized block header.
- Let `Block Hash` be the BLAKE2b-256 hash over the serialized content of the _Block_ field.
- Let `Serialized Signature` be the serialized _Signature_.
- Let `ID` be the BLAKE2b-256 hash of the concatenation of `Block Header Hash`, `Block Hash` and `Serialized Signature`.
- Let `Slot Index` be the slot index of the `Issuing Time` of the block.
- Let `Serialized Slot Index` be the little-endian serialized `Slot Index`.
- Let `Block ID` be the concatenation of `ID` and `Serialized Slot Index`.

The string format of the Block ID is the hexadecimal encoding of the `Block ID` with a `0x` prefix.

## Work Score

The Work Score expresses the cost of an object in terms of computational requirements for a node to process it. It
differs from the storage deposit in that it only accounts for one-off costs that the processing of a block and its
payload incur, while the storage deposit accounts for recurring costs like data storage or holding block issuer keys in
memory. The work score attempts to encapsulate all processing steps carried out on this object throughout its life in
the node. The calculation of the work score is done with the use of the _Work Score Structure_ protocol parameters. The
work score is expressed as a `uint32` and all operations used in its calculation are integer arithmetic.

## Time

Protocol time is divided into slots and epochs. And epoch consists of `2^(Slots Per Epoch Exponent)` slots and each slot
is `Slot Duration In Seconds` seconds in length.

### Slot Index

Each slot has a corresponding slot index, which is a `uint64`. To calculate the slot index of a timestamp, the protocol
parameters `Genesis Unix Timestamp` and `Slot Duration In Seconds` are used. The slot index of a Unix timestamp
`Unix Timestamp` (in seconds) is calculated as follows:

- Compute `Elapsed Time` as `Unix Timestamp - Genesis Unix Timestamp`.
- If `Elapsed Time < 0`, the slot index is `0`.
- Otherwise the slot index is `Elapsed Time/Slot Duration In Seconds + 1`.
  - Note: The `+ 1` is required because slots are counted starting from `1` with `0` being reserved for times before the
    genesis, which has to be addressable as its own slot.

### Epoch Index

Each epoch has a corresponding epoch index, which is a `uint64`. To calculate the epoch index of a slot index, that is,
the index of the epoch to which the slot belongs, the protocol parameter `Slots Per Epoch Exponent` is used. The epoch
index of a slot index `Slot Index` is `Slot Index >> Slots Per Epoch Exponent`, where `>>` is the _zero-fill
right-shift_ or _logical shift_ operation.

## Slot Commitment

A Slot Commitment contains a summary of a slot. The Slot Commitment is serialized as follows:

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Name</th>
    <th>Type</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Version</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>
      The version of the protocol in which this commitment was created.
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Index</td>
    <td>uint64</td>
    <td>
      The slot index.
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Prev ID</td>
    <td>ByteArray[40]</td>
    <td>The slot identifier of the previous slot in the chain.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Roots ID</td>
    <td>ByteArray[32]</td>
    <td>The Merkle Tree Root of all commitment elements.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Cumulative Weight</td>
    <td>uint64</td>
    <td>The weight of the chain of the <code>Index</code> minus <code>Maximum Committable Age</code> slots in the past. This value is required for attestations and is used by node in chain switching mechanism.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>RMC</td>
    <td>uint64</td>
    <td>This field provides the Reference Mana Cost (RMC) to be used in the slot with index <code>Index + Max Committable Age</code>. Each new RMC value for a slot with index <code>i</code> is calculated upon commitment based on the RMC from slot <code>i - 1</code> and the total work score of blocks in slot <code>i</code>. It is convenient to store the RMC in the commitment to avoid having to recalculate it from genesis when syncing.
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

### Slot Commitment ID

A Slot Commitment ID denotes an identifier of a slot commitment, with type `ByteArray[40]`. It is calculated with the
following steps:

- Let `Content` be the serialized slot commitment.
- Let `Content Hash` be the BLAKE2b-256 hash of `Content`.
- Let `Slot Index` be the slot index of the slot commitment.
- Let `Serialized Slot Index` be the little-endian serialized `Slot Index`.
- Let `Commitment ID` be the concatenation of `Content Hash` and `Slot Index`.

The string format of a Slot Commitment ID is the hexadecimal encoding of the Slot Commitment ID with `0x` prefix.

### Semantic Validation

- The `Index` of the commitment must be in the closed interval
  `[BlockSlot-MaxCommittableAge, BlockSlot-MinCommittableAge]`, where `BlockSlot` is the slot index corresponding to the
  `Issuing Time` of the block containing the commitment.

## Signature

The _Ed25519 Signature_ is supported. It is serialized as follows:

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Name</th>
    <th>Type</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Type</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>
      Set to <strong>value 0</strong> to denote an <i>Ed25519 Signature</i>.
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Public Key</td>
    <td>ByteArray[32]</td>
    <td>The Ed25519 public key of the signature.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Signature</td>
    <td>ByteArray[64]</td>
    <td>The Ed25519 signature computed according to <a href="#signature-creation">Signature Creation</a>.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

### Signature Creation

The _Signature_ field over the block is computed as follows:

- Let `Block Header Hash` be the BLAKE2b-256 hash over the serialized block header.
- Let `Block Hash` be the BLAKE2b-256 hash over the serialized content of the _Block_ field.
- Let `Signing Input` be the concatenation of `Block Header Hash` and `Block Hash`.
- Let the resulting signature be the Ed25519 signature of `Signing Input`.

**Semantic Validation**

In order for the signature to be valid all of the following conditions must hold:

- The `Public Key` must verify the `Signature`, according to [TIP-14](../TIP-0014/tip-0014.md).
- The `Public Key` must be included as a _Block Issuer Key_ in the Account identified by the block's `Issuer ID` field.
  This check is executed against the account state at the slot index corresponding to the slot commitment of the block.

### Work Score

Let the Work Score of a Signature be defined as follows.

- If the type is _Ed25519 Signature_ the work score is `Work Score Signature Ed25519`.

# Blocks

## Block Wrapper

The two block types introduced in this TIP share some common fields which are contained in an outer wrapper. This _Block
Wrapper_ is only introduced as a way to deduplicate the definition of those fields. It is not a standalone block type.

All fields of a _Block Wrapper_ except for the _Block_ and _Signature_ constitute the _Block Header_.

The _Block Wrapper_ is serialized as follows:

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Name</th>
    <th>Type</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Protocol Version</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>This field denotes what protocol rules apply to the block.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Network ID</td>
    <td>uint64</td>
    <td>Network identifier. Usually, it will be set to the first 8 bytes of the BLAKE2b-256 hash of the concatenation of the network type and the protocol version string.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Issuing Time</td>
    <td>uint64</td>
    <td>The time at which the block was issued. It is a Unix timestamp in nanoseconds.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Slot Commitment ID</td>
    <td>ByteArray[40]</td>
    <td>The identifier of the slot this block commits to. More details in the <a href="#slot-commitment-id">Slot Commitment ID section</a>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Latest Finalized Slot</td>
    <td>uint64</td>
    <td>The slot index of the latest finalized slot.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Issuer ID</td>
    <td>ByteArray[32]</td>
    <td>The identifier of the account that issued this block.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Block <code>oneOf</code></td>
    <td colspan="2">
      <details>
        <summary>Basic Block</summary>
        <blockquote>
          A Basic Block. More details in the <a href="#basic-block">Basic Block section</a>.
        </blockquote>
      </details>
      <details>
        <summary>Validation Block</summary>
        <blockquote>
          A Validation Block. More details in the <a href="#validation-block">Validation Block section</a>.
        </blockquote>
      </details>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Signature <code>oneOf</code></td>
    <td colspan="2">
      <details>
        <summary>Ed25519 Signature</summary>
        <blockquote>
          An Ed25519 Signature. More details in the <a href="#signature">Signature section</a>.
        </blockquote>
      </details>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

### Work Score

The work score of a block wrapper is given by:

- Let `Block Size` be the size of the serialized block.
- Let `Size Score` be `Block Size * Data Kibibyte / 1024`
- Let `Inner Block Score` be the work score of the contained `Block`.
- Let `Signature Score` be the work score of the `Signature`.
- Return `Size Score + Inner Block Score + Signature Score`.

## Basic Block

### Serialized Layout

The serialized layout of a _Basic Block_ is that of a _Block Wrapper_ with the _Block_ field containing the following
layout:

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Name</th>
    <th>Type</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Type</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>Set to <strong>value 0</strong> to denote a <i>Basic Block</i>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Strong Parents Count</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>The number of blocks that are strongly directly approved.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Strong Parents <code>anyOf</code></td>
    <td colspan="2">
      <details>
        <summary>Parent</summary>
        <blockquote>
          References another directly approved block.
        </blockquote>
        <table>
          <tr>
            <th>Name</th>
            <th>Type</th>
            <th>Description</th>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Block ID</td>
            <td>ByteArray[40]</td>
            <td>The Block ID of the strong parent.</td>
          </tr>
        </table>
      </details>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Weak Parents Count</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>The number of blocks that are weakly directly approved.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Weak Parents <code>optAnyOf</code></td>
    <td colspan="2">
      <details>
        <summary>Parent</summary>
        <blockquote>
          References another directly approved block.
        </blockquote>
        <table>
          <tr>
            <th>Name</th>
            <th>Type</th>
            <th>Description</th>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Block ID</td>
            <td>ByteArray[40]</td>
            <td>The Block ID of the parent.</td>
          </tr>
        </table>
      </details>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Shallow Like Parents Count</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>The number of blocks that are directly referenced to adjust opinion.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Shallow Like Parents <code>optAnyOf</code></td>
    <td colspan="2">
      <details>
        <summary>Parent</summary>
        <table>
          <tr>
            <th>Name</th>
            <th>Type</th>
            <th>Description</th>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Block ID</td>
            <td>ByteArray[40]</td>
            <td>The Block ID of the parent.</td>
          </tr>
        </table>
      </details>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Payload Length</td>
    <td>uint32</td>
    <td>The length of the following payload in bytes. A length of 0 means no payload will be attached.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Payload <code>optOneOf</code></td>
    <td colspan="2">
      <details>
        <summary>Tagged Data Payload</summary>
        <blockquote>
          With Payload Type 5, more details are described in Tagged Data Payload section.
        </blockquote>
      </details>
      <details>
        <summary>Transaction Payload</summary>
        <blockquote>
          With Payload Type 6, more details are described in Transaction section.
        </blockquote>
      </details>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>Burned Mana</td>
    <td>uint64</td>
    <td>The amount of Mana the Account identified by <code>Issuer ID</code> is at most willing to burn for this block. The actual Mana deducted from this Account's Block Issuance Credit is calculated according to the product of the block's work score and the current RMC (Reference Mana Cost) value which may be lower than the value of this field.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

### Syntactic validation

The Tangle can only contain syntactically valid blocks. Invalid blocks must be rejected by the node. The following
criteria defines whether the block passes the syntactic validation:

- The total length of the serialized block must not exceed `Max Block Length`.
- `Type` must comply with the allowed block types for the `Protocol Version` config parameter of the node.
  - It must hold true that 1 ≤ `Strong Parents Count` ≤ 8.
  - It must hold true that 0 ≤ `Weak Parents Count` ≤ 8.
  - It must hold true that 0 ≤ `Shallow Like Parents Count` ≤ 8.
- `Strong Parents`, `Weak Parents`, `Shallow Like Parents` must comply with the following rules:
  - must be lexically ordered.
  - must not have duplicates in each list.
- `Weak Parents` must be disjoint to the rest of the parents, no weak parent should be in either strong or shallow like
  parents.
- Payload (if present):
  - `Payload Type` must match one of the values described under [Payloads](#payloads).
  - `Data Fields` must be correctly parsable in the context of the `Payload Type`.
  - The payload itself must pass syntactic validation.
- There must be no trailing bytes after all block fields have been parsed.
- If a `Block` contains a transaction payload, the block is valid only if all of the following conditions hold:
  - The Slot Index `Block Slot` corresponding to the `Issuing Time` of a block must be greater or equal than the
    `Creation Slot` of the contained transaction.
  - If the transaction includes a `Commitment Input`, the `Slot Index` field of the commitment to which the input
    resolves must be in the closed interval `[Block Slot - Max Committable Age, Block Slot - Min Committable Age]`

### Semantic Validation

- The `Signature` must pass semantic validation.

### Payloads

While blocks without a payload, i.e. `Payload Length` set to zero, are valid, such blocks do not contain any
information. As such, blocks usually contain a payload. The detailed specification of each payload type is out of scope
of this TIP. The following table lists all currently specified payloads that can be part of a block and links to their
specification:

| Payload Name | Type Value | TIP                               |
| ------------ | ---------- | --------------------------------- |
| No Payload   | -          | -                                 |
| Tagged Data  | 5          | [TIP-23](../TIP-0023/tip-0023.md) |
| Transaction  | 7          | [TIP-45](../TIP-0045/tip-0045.md) |

### Work Score

Let the work score of a _Basic Block_ be defined as follows.

- Let `Missing Parents Score` be defined as:
  - If `Strong Parents Count < Work Score Min Strong Parents Threshold`:
    `Work Score Missing Parent * (Work Score Min Strong Parents Threshold - Strong Parents Count)`.
  - Otherwise `0`.
- Let `Payload Score` be the work score of the contained `Payload` if it exists, or `0` if it does not exist.
  - If the type is _Tagged Data_ the work score is `0`.
  - If the type is _Transaction_ the work score is defined in TIP-45.
- Return `Work Score Block + Missing Parents Score + Payload Score`.

## Validation Block

A Validation Block is a special type of block used by validators to secure the network. It is recognised by the
Congestion Control of the IOTA 2.0 protocol and can be issued without burning Mana within the constraints of the allowed
validator throughput. It is allowed to reference more parent blocks than a normal _Basic Block_.

### Serialized Layout

The serialized layout of a _Validation Block_ is that of a _Block Wrapper_ with the _Block_ field containing the
following layout:

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Name</th>
    <th>Type</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
 <tr>
    <td>Type</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>Set to <strong>value 1</strong> to denote a <i>Validation Block</i>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Strong Parents Count</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>The number of blocks that are strongly directly approved.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Strong Parents <code>anyOf</code></td>
    <td colspan="2">
      <details>
        <summary>Parent</summary>
        <blockquote>
          References another directly approved block.
        </blockquote>
        <table>
          <tr>
            <th>Name</th>
            <th>Type</th>
            <th>Description</th>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Block ID</td>
            <td>ByteArray[40]</td>
            <td>The Block ID of the strong parent.</td>
          </tr>
        </table>
      </details>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Weak Parents Count</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>The number of blocks that are weakly directly approved.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Weak Parents <code>anyOf</code></td>
    <td colspan="2">
      <details>
        <summary>Parent</summary>
        <blockquote>
          References another directly approved block.
        </blockquote>
        <table>
          <tr>
            <th>Name</th>
            <th>Type</th>
            <th>Description</th>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Block ID</td>
            <td>ByteArray[40]</td>
            <td>The Block ID of the parent.</td>
          </tr>
        </table>
      </details>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Shallow Like Parents Count</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>The number of blocks that are directly referenced to adjust opinion.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Shallow Like Parents <code>anyOf</code></td>
    <td colspan="2">
      <details>
        <summary>Parent</summary>
        <table>
          <tr>
            <th>Name</th>
            <th>Type</th>
            <th>Description</th>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Block ID</td>
            <td>ByteArray[40]</td>
            <td>The Block ID of the parent.</td>
          </tr>
        </table>
      </details>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Highest Supported Version</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>The highest supported protocol version the issuer of this block supports. TODO: Add more details.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Protocol Parameters Hash</td>
    <td>ByteArray[32]</td>
    <td>The hash of the protocol parameters for the Highest Supported Version.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

### Syntactic validation

The Tangle can only contain syntactically valid blocks. Invalid blocks must be rejected by the node. The following
criteria defines whether the block passes the syntactic validation:

- The total length of the serialized block must not exceed `Max Block Length`.
- `Type` must comply with the allowed block types for the `Protocol Version` config parameter of the node.
  - It must hold true that 1 ≤ `Strong Parents Count` ≤ 50.
  - It must hold true that 0 ≤ `Weak Parents Count` ≤ 50.
  - It must hold true that 0 ≤ `Shallow Like Parents Count` ≤ 50.
- `Strong Parents`, `Weak Parents`, `Shallow Like Parents` must comply with the following rules:
  - must be lexically ordered.
  - must not have duplicates in each list.
- `Weak Parents` must be disjoint to the rest of the parents: No weak parent should be in either `Strong Parents`
  or`Shallow Like Parents`.
- Each `Block ID` must be unique.
- `Payload Length` must be 0 and the `Payload` must not be present.
- There must be no trailing bytes after all block fields have been parsed.
- `Highest Supported Version` must be greater or equal to `Protocol Version`.

### Semantic Validation

- The `Signature` must pass semantic validation.

## Work Score

The work score of a _Validation Block_ is `0`.

# Rationale and alternatives

**Block ID & Signature**

Splitting the signing input of a Block Signature into a header and block part allows for verification of an attestation
where only the header and block hash are known. In a similar way, a Block ID can be recomputed from an attestation
without having the entire block.

**Validation Block**

The alternative could be to use a `Block` instead of `Validation Block` with some additional validation logic. However,
having a separate block type for validator related responsibilities is much cleaner and allows for additional changes
like allowing to reference more parents, or having specific payload types or fields in the future.

**Burned Mana**

The rationale for including the `Burned Mana` field on the block is the following. For a given block, the account
identified by the `Issuer ID` field on the block needs to burn the amount of Mana corresponding to the RMC and the block
size. A malicious node might provide a false, lower RMC value. If the field was not present, the required Mana would be
deducted from the account's Block Issuance Credit (BIC), but the account would not allot enough Mana in the containing
transaction, since it assumed a lower RMC value. This would result in a negative BIC balance and the locking of the
account. The `Burned Mana` field prevents this situation by effectively stating the assumption under which the account
operates. If `Burned Mana` is lower than it should be, the block can simply be dropped without incurring a cost for the
issuing account. Thus, as long as `Burned Mana` matches the amount allotted in the contained transaction, the
transaction will never result in the locking of the account.

# Appendix

## Test Vectors

### Slot Commitment ID

```
{
  "version":3,
  "index":"10",
  "previousCommitmentId":"0x4b024b3e47280d05272a7d136f0c464e4e136b734e6c427749413e286162077560652c007e37241a",
  "rootsId":"0x75614402763f5f045c040334631b791b4d755d626d504b134a505c001c516549",
  "cumulativeWeight":"100",
  "referenceManaCost":"6000"
}
```

Serialized bytes:

```
[3 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 75 2 75 62 71 40 13 5 39 42 125 19 111 12 70 78 78 19 107 115 78 108 66 119 73 65 62 40 97 98 7 117 96 101 44 0 126 55 36 26 117 97 68 2 118 63 95 4 92 4 3 52 99 27 121 27 77 117 93 98 109 80 75 19 74 80 92 0 28 81 101 73 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 112 23 0 0 0 0 0 0]
```

Slot Commitment ID: `0x3a73079f3dbf8c1744ae0b020b9767546e32f5bbbf4c6f0233da7b64f16581f80a00000000000000`

### Transaction ID

```
{
  "type":6,
  "essence":{
    "type":2,
    "networkId":"3650798313638353144",
    "creationSlot":"28",
    "contextInputs":[],
    "inputs":[
      {
        "type":0,
        "transactionId":"0x24ff9b3038506fb1b406306a496001c3e24e2be07c838317922bf21d686a078f",
        "transactionOutputIndex":10
      }
    ],
    "inputsCommitment":"0xb70c6f86a1ea03a59a71d73dcd07e2082bbdf0ce971faa21748348bca22fb023",
    "outputs":[
      {
        "type":3,
        "amount":"10000",
        "mana":"0",
        "unlockConditions":[
          {
            "type":0,
            "address":{
              "type":0,
              "pubKeyHash":"0xd9f84458286dc41cd34789dec566cd096cf47de991aa36a97aebfaea14128f6d"
            }
          }
        ]
      }
    ],
    "allotments":[],
    "payload":{
      "type":5,
      "tag":"0x1d7b3e11697264111e130b0e",
      "data":"0x1d7b3e11697264111e130b0e"
    }
  },
  "unlocks":[
    {
      "type":0,
      "signature":{
        "type":0,
        "publicKey":"0x803361fe1effc899dca7f931d8ad07c01ba23aaa93f986adb04d4c17cf6368d8",
        "signature":"0xccddbac3aaac413e0193e16da3449f30c183d0e7eaa7f303dc12ae0dbc9fb890e449a52f9056e7d952ea796fd3e5645f60d9eb98ed91cb3261720fb528d2a105"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Serialized bytes:

```
[6 0 0 0 2 248 88 2 55 185 61 170 50 28 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 36 255 155 48 56 80 111 177 180 6 48 106 73 96 1 195 226 78 43 224 124 131 131 23 146 43 242 29 104 106 7 143 10 0 183 12 111 134 161 234 3 165 154 113 215 61 205 7 226 8 43 189 240 206 151 31 170 33 116 131 72 188 162 47 176 35 1 0 3 16 39 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 217 248 68 88 40 109 196 28 211 71 137 222 197 102 205 9 108 244 125 233 145 170 54 169 122 235 250 234 20 18 143 109 0 0 0 33 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 12 29 123 62 17 105 114 100 17 30 19 11 14 12 0 0 0 29 123 62 17 105 114 100 17 30 19 11 14 1 0 0 0 128 51 97 254 30 255 200 153 220 167 249 49 216 173 7 192 27 162 58 170 147 249 134 173 176 77 76 23 207 99 104 216 204 221 186 195 170 172 65 62 1 147 225 109 163 68 159 48 193 131 208 231 234 167 243 3 220 18 174 13 188 159 184 144 228 73 165 47 144 86 231 217 82 234 121 111 211 229 100 95 96 217 235 152 237 145 203 50 97 114 15 181 40 210 161 5]
```

Transaction ID: `0xc4f095a7ee824c8fd53040c4143963153636d56bb2334167fd4f531472682533`

### Basic Block ID (Tagged Data payload)

```
{
  "protocolVersion":3,
  "networkId":"0",
  "issuingTime":"1694608262748556515",
  "slotCommitmentId":"0x49100d1d05557c7c204c221d5a3415570009752f7b10356d062c6d730d0568497e2c3c3d480d7d23",
  "latestFinalizedSlot":"2",
  "issuerId":"0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
  "block": {
    "type":0,
    "strongParents":[
      "0x00627e507d71337c3c1647747e5a4b565f2a71480e62170e1b3f085e0e0a41321c017a4d2b3b4210",
      "0x03485a0516062d003a646a40676d5c1c1e0d574822443c630a08385836101a5c33181f2314573706",
      "0x4274246513610f1b044562676e125e1e11781e5a0a2b4c5d1d6e7c2b792c163e5f74393149311513",
      "0x7549226845340f730244733152263e553036684748704d5f74017c3b573c1b21345e59644c286b5e"
    ],
    "weakParents":[
      "0x12731a211b5323256c2c295564532a246125681d1163585f077149137578585e75407a5a4c51485a"
    ],
    "shallowLikeParents":[
      "0x1e1f5b10094a7e01134d65325f395c2d507703172e4b740814582b5a52536c1315706727541a582b"
    ],
    "payload":{
      "type":5,
      "tag":"0x68656c6c6f20776f726c64",
      "data":"0x01020304"
    },
    "burnedMana":"100"
  },
  "signature":{
    "type":0,
    "publicKey":"0x0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
    "signature":"0x00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000"
  }
}
```

Serialized bytes:

```
[3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 227 204 145 142 60 117 132 23 73 16 13 29 5 85 124 124 32 76 34 29 90 52 21 87 0 9 117 47 123 16 53 109 6 44 109 115 13 5 104 73 126 44 60 61 72 13 125 35 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 98 126 80 125 113 51 124 60 22 71 116 126 90 75 86 95 42 113 72 14 98 23 14 27 63 8 94 14 10 65 50 28 1 122 77 43 59 66 16 3 72 90 5 22 6 45 0 58 100 106 64 103 109 92 28 30 13 87 72 34 68 60 99 10 8 56 88 54 16 26 92 51 24 31 35 20 87 55 6 66 116 36 101 19 97 15 27 4 69 98 103 110 18 94 30 17 120 30 90 10 43 76 93 29 110 124 43 121 44 22 62 95 116 57 49 73 49 21 19 117 73 34 104 69 52 15 115 2 68 115 49 82 38 62 85 48 54 104 71 72 112 77 95 116 1 124 59 87 60 27 33 52 94 89 100 76 40 107 94 1 18 115 26 33 27 83 35 37 108 44 41 85 100 83 42 36 97 37 104 29 17 99 88 95 7 113 73 19 117 120 88 94 117 64 122 90 76 81 72 90 1 30 31 91 16 9 74 126 1 19 77 101 50 95 57 92 45 80 119 3 23 46 75 116 8 20 88 43 90 82 83 108 19 21 112 103 39 84 26 88 43 24 0 0 0 5 0
 0 0 11 104 101 108 108 111 32 119 111 114 108 100 4 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 100 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0]
```

Block ID: `0xd5b4743580e968c6418b279620fa690331b51cfff28464f8d767e43fd586f0190100000000000000`

### Basic Block ID (Transaction payload)

```
{
  "protocolVersion":3,
  "networkId":"3650798313638353144",
  "issuingTime":"1694613463455944982",
  "slotCommitment":"0x5893048146ba125ea69c85a08bc122afec11baf6115ce03fc1d989df6aff2cdf1500000000000000",
  "latestFinalizedSlot":"21",
  "issuerId":"0x907c02e9302e0f0571f10f885594e56d8c54ff0708ab7a39bc1b74d396b93b12",
  "block":{
    "type":0,
    "strongParents":[
      "0xac5668c6ba7b3471a37e4a64c6611090b67babd368e1f5b670e30fb4eadba59d1c00000000000000"
    ],
    "weakParents":[],
    "shallowLikeParents":[],
    "payload":{
      "type":6,
      "essence":{
        "type":2,
        "networkId":"3650798313638353144",
        "creationSlot":"28",
        "contextInputs":[],
        "inputs":[
          {
            "type":0,
            "transactionId":"0x24ff9b3038506fb1b406306a496001c3e24e2be07c838317922bf21d686a078f",
            "transactionOutputIndex":10
          }
        ],
        "inputsCommitment":"0xb70c6f86a1ea03a59a71d73dcd07e2082bbdf0ce971faa21748348bca22fb023",
        "outputs":[
          {
            "type":3,
            "amount":"10000",
            "mana":"0",
            "unlockConditions":[
              {
                "type":0,
                "address":{
                  "type":0,
                  "pubKeyHash":"0xd9f84458286dc41cd34789dec566cd096cf47de991aa36a97aebfaea14128f6d"
                }
              }
            ]
          }
        ],
        "allotments":[],
        "payload":{
          "type":5,
          "tag":"0x1d7b3e11697264111e130b0e",
          "data":"0x1d7b3e11697264111e130b0e"
        }
      },
      "unlocks":[
        {
          "type":0,
          "signature":{
            "type":0,
            "publicKey":"0x803361fe1effc899dca7f931d8ad07c01ba23aaa93f986adb04d4c17cf6368d8",
            "signature":"0xccddbac3aaac413e0193e16da3449f30c183d0e7eaa7f303dc12ae0dbc9fb890e449a52f9056e7d952ea796fd3e5645f60d9eb98ed91cb3261720fb528d2a105"
          }
        }
      ]
    },
    "burnedMana":"180500"
  },
  "signature":{
    "type":0,
    "publicKey":"0x293dc170d9a59474e6d81cfba7f7d924c09b25d7166bcfba606e53114d0a758b",
    "signature":"0xf4dca05ba024867984cfd657aac7c4f782a8bf5830dcbea482f351c578ffb4db061dd30a31816e9b7ba6e7096d63ff1209f9a2a0449ac7277cae5d3ebc87310f"
  }
}
```

Serialized bytes:

```
[3 248 88 2 55 185 61 170 50 22 209 226 112 247 121 132 23 88 147 4 129 70 186 18 94 166 156 133 160 139 193 34 175 236 17 186 246 17 92 224 63 193 217 137 223 106 255 44 223 21 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 21 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 144 124 2 233 48 46 15 5 113 241 15 136 85 148 229 109 140 84 255 7 8 171 122 57 188 27 116 211 150 185 59 18 0 1 172 86 104 198 186 123 52 113 163 126 74 100 198 97 16 144 182 123 171 211 104 225 245 182 112 227 15 180 234 219 165 157 28 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 31 1 0 0 6 0 0 0 2 248 88 2 55 185 61 170 50 28 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 36 255 155 48 56 80 111 177 180 6 48 106 73 96 1 195 226 78 43 224 124 131 131 23 146 43 242 29 104 106 7 143 10 0 183 12 111 134 161 234 3 165 154 113 215 61 205 7 226 8 43 189 240 206 151 31 170 33 116 131 72 188 162 47 176 35 1 0 3 16 39 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 217 248 68 88 40 109 196 28 211 71 137 222 197 102 205 9 108 244 125 233 145 170 54 169 122 235 250 234 20 18 143 109 0 0 0 33 0 0 0 5 0 0 0 12 29 123 62 17 105 114 100 17 30 19 11 14 12 0 0 0 29 123 62 17 105 114 100 17 30 19 11 14 1 0 0 0 128 51 97 254 30 255 200 153 220 167 249 49 216 173 7 192 27 162 58 170 147 249 134 173 176 77 76 23 207 99 104 216 204 221 186 195 170 172 65 62 1 147 225 109 163 68 159 48 193 131 208 231 234 167 243 3 220 18 174 13 188 159 184 144 228 73 165 47 144 86 231 217 82 234 121 111 211 229 100 95 96 217 235 152 237 145 203 50 97 114 15 181 40 210 161 5 20 193 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 41 61 193 112 217 165 148 116 230 216 28 251 167 247 217 36 192 155 37 215 22 107 207 186 96 110 83 17 77 10 117 139 244 220 160 91 160 36 134 121 132 207 214 87 170 199 196 247 130 168 191 88 48 220 190 164 130 243 81 197 120 255 180 219 6 29 211 10 49 129 110 155 123 166 231 9 109 99 255 18 9 249 162 160 68 154 199 39 124 174 93 62 188 135 49 15]
```

Block ID: `0xddebfd0434bfe8140c938d4124ab76e9fee7e18ca7a7be1ba7331d42868724d91c00000000000000`

### Validation Block ID

```
{
  "protocolVersion":3,
  "networkId":"10549460113735494767",
  "issuingTime":"1675563954966263210",
  "slotCommitmentId":"0x498bf08a5ed287bc87340341ffab28706768cd3a7035ae5e33932d9a12bb30940000000000000000",
  "latestFinalizedSlot":"0",
  "issuerId":"0x3370746f30705b7d0b42597459714d45241e5a64761b09627c447b751c7e145c",
  "block":{
    "type":1,
    "strongParents":[
      "0x304442486c7a05361408585e4b5f7a67441c437528755a70041e0e557a6d4b2d7d4362083d492b57",
      "0x5f736978340a243d381b343b160b316a6b7d4b1e3c0355492e2e72113c2b126600157e69113c0b5c"
    ],
    "weakParents":[
      "0x0b5a48384f382f4a49471c4860683c6f0a0d446f012e1b117c4e405f5e24497c72691f43535c0b42"
    ],
    "shallowLikeParents":[
      "0x163007217803006078040b0f51507d3572355a457839095e572f125500401b7d220c772b56165a12"
    ],
    "highestSupportedVersion":3,
    "protocolParametersHash":"0xf6021fae654975db2e82c17444dc8d43573cb4222f506fb46ba46a097cf8c873"
  },
  "signature":{
    "type":0,
    "publicKey":"0x024b6f086177156350111d5e56227242034e596b7e3d0901180873740723193c",
    "signature":"0x7c274e5e771d5d60202d334f06773d3672484b1e4e6f03231b4e69305329267a4834374b0f2e0d5c6c2f7779620f4f534c773b1679400c52303d1f23121a4049"
  }
}
```

Serialized bytes:

```
[3 111 44 91 123 20 54 103 146 170 117 54 30 138 204 64 23 73 139 240 138 94 210 135 188 135 52 3 65 255 171 40 112 103 104 205 58 112 53 174 94 51 147 45 154 18 187 48 148 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 51 112 116 111 48 112 91 125 11 66 89 116 89 113 77 69 36 30 90 100 118 27 9 98 124 68 123 117 28 126 20 92 1 2 48 68 66 72 108 122 5 54 20 8 88 94 75 95 122 103 68 28 67 117 40 117 90 112 4 30 14 85 122 109 75 45 125 67 98 8 61 73 43 87 95 115 105 120 52 10 36 61 56 27 52 59 22 11 49 106 107 125 75 30 60 3 85 73 46 46 114 17 60 43 18 102 0 21 126 105 17 60 11 92 1 11 90 72 56 79 56 47 74 73 71 28 72 96 104 60 111 10 13 68 111 1 46 27 17 124 78 64 95 94 36 73 124 114 105 31 67 83 92 11 66 1 22 48 7 33 120 3 0 96 120 4 11 15 81 80 125 53 114 53 90 69 120 57 9 94 87 47 18 85 0 64 27 125 34 12 119 43 86 22 90 18 3 246 2 31 174 101 73 117 219 46 130 193 116 68 220 141 67 87 60 180 34 47 80 111 180 107 164 106 9 124 248 200 115 0 2 75 111 8 97 119 21 99 80 17 29 94 86 34 114 66 3 78 89 107 126 61 9 1 24 8 115 116 7 35 25 60 124 39 78 94 119 29 93 96 32 45 51 79 6 119 61 54 114 72 75 30 78 111 3 35 27 78 105 48 83 41 38 122 72 52 55 75 15 46 13 92 108 47 119 121 98 15 79 83 76 119 59 22 121 64 12 82 48 61 31 35 18 26 64 73]
```

Block ID: `0x58861f95e72f76d31061c20408c5e176f31f111f794dd4d5e7b33ce42d4f11440000000000000000`

The containing protocol parameter hash is calculated from the following:
```
{
  "type":0,
  "version":3,
  "networkName":"TestJungle",
  "bech32Hrp":"tgl",
  "rentStructure":{
    "vByteCost":0,
    "vByteFactorData":0,
    "vByteFactorKey":0,
    "vByteFactorBlockIssuerKey":0,
    "vByteFactorStakingFeature":0,
    "vByteFactorDelegation":0
  },
  "workScoreStructure":{
    "workScoreDataKibibyte":0,
    "workScoreBlock":1,
    "workScoreMissingParent":0,
    "workScoreInput":0,
    "workScoreContextInput":0,
    "workScoreOutput":0,
    "workScoreNativeToken":0,
    "workScoreStaking":0,
    "workScoreBlockIssuer":0,
    "workScoreAllotment":0,
    "workScoreSignatureEd25519":0,
    "workScoreMinStrongParentsThreshold":0
  },
  "tokenSupply":"2779530283277761",
  "genesisUnixTimestamp":"1695275822",
  "slotDurationInSeconds":10,
  "slotsPerEpochExponent":13,
  "manaStructure":{
    "manaBitsCount":63,
    "manaGenerationRate":1,
    "manaGenerationRateExponent":17,
    "manaDecayFactors":[10,20],
    "manaDecayFactorsExponent":32,
    "manaDecayFactorEpochsSum":2420916375,
    "manaDecayFactorEpochsSumExponent":21
  },
  "stakingUnbondingPeriod":"10",
  "validationBlocksPerSlot":10,
  "punishmentEpochs":"10",
  "livenessThreshold":"3",
  "minCommittableAge":"10",
  "maxCommittableAge":"20",
  "epochNearingThreshold":"24",
  "congestionControlParameters":{
    "rmcMin":"1",
    "increase":"0",
    "decrease":"0",
    "increaseThreshold":800000,
    "decreaseThreshold":500000,
    "schedulerRate":100000,
    "minMana":"1",
    "maxBufferSize":1000,
    "maxValidationBufferSize":100
  },
  "versionSignaling":{
    "windowSize":7,
    "windowTargetRatio":5,
    "activationOffset":7
  }
}
```

Serialized bytes:
```
[0 3 10 84 101 115 116 74 117 110 103 108 101 3 116 103 108 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 193 93 45 211 247 223 9 0 46 219 11 101 0 0 0 0 10 13 63 1 17 2 0 10 0 0 0 20 0 0 0 32 151 64 76 144 21 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 24 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 53 12 0 32 161 7 0 160 134 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 232 3 0 0 100 0 0 0 7 5 7]
```

Protocol parameters hash: `0xf6021fae654975db2e82c17444dc8d43573cb4222f506fb46ba46a097cf8c873`
# Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
