# Chrysalis RFC Call - 2020-06-04

## Participants

- Wolfgang
- Thibault
- Luca
- Gal
- Hans

## Topics

### Communication

- General discussions on Discord #protocol
- More special Slack #rfc-consensus
- Upload meeting notes to GitHub
  (@Wolfgang check and set up)
- Have another call to clarify about UTxO basics before drafting that RFC

### RFC Status

- [RFC-0001](https://github.com/iotaledger/protocol-rfcs/pull/1): simple but not directly Chrysalis related @all please review
- [RFC-0002](https://github.com/iotaledger/protocol-rfcs/pull/2): @Luca close
- [RFC-0009](https://github.com/Wollac/protocol-rfcs/blob/ed25519/text/0009-ed25519-signature-scheme/0009-ed25519-signature-scheme.md): no longer relevant, @Wolfgang close to avoid confusion
- [RFC-0010](https://github.com/Wollac/protocol-rfcs/blob/mnemonic-seed/text/0010-mnemonic-seed/0010-mnemonic-seed.md): Not part of Chrysalis, relevant for the wallet team
- [RFC-0005](https://github.com/iotaledger/protocol-rfcs/blob/master/text/0005-white-flag/0005-white-flag.md): @Thibault clarify bundle validity
- [RFC-0008](https://github.com/luca-moser/protocol-rfcs/blob/rfc-urts-tip-sel/text/0008-weighted-uniform-random-tip-selection/0008-weighted-uniform-random-tip-selection.md):
  - @Luca add bundle validity and selection delay as discussed
  - @all review (and approve) when Luca is done
- [RFC-0012](https://github.com/Wollac/protocol-rfcs/blob/milestone-merkle-validation/text/0012-milestone-merkle-validation/0012-milestone-merkle-validation.md):
  - There are ambiguities about the bytes->trytes conversion preventing the approval.
  - @Wolfgang write a separate RFC about this particular conversion with pseudo-code and examples.

#### Bundle validity

- A bundle is to be considered valid, if it is syntactically valid (e.g. indices, balance 0, < max supply, ...) _and_ its signatures are valid.
- White-flag and tip selection must only include valid bundles. Invalid bundles will be discarded and _not_ ignored.

#### Tip Selection delay

- Motivation: For low TPS there should be the possibility to keep transactions in the selection pool, in order for the Tangle to remain wide enough. 
- time based: there are possibilities of race conditions and finding a good values for TPS scenarios is hard
- #approver based: reasonable mechanism, automatically "adapting" to different TPS scenarios: remove a transaction only from the pool, if it has at least k direct approvers. A k of 2 is a good start, but this should be configurable. No further discussion, analysis needed.

### New RFCs

#### MS selection

- Briefly discussed idea/motivation: https://iota.cafe/t/coordinator-improvements/310
- White flag + Check Points already offers strong protection but "heaviest branch" aims to "mathematically" maximize CTPS so it is worth looking at it.
- PoC https://github.com/Wollac/hornet/tree/feat/hps initial artificial benchmarks promising for several thousands of bundles
- Not the highest priority as any reasonable Tip Selection will already work well for white-flag.
- Gal, Wolfgang will continue working on this topic/RFC in parallel with the other topics

### UTxO (with a Coordinator)

- Re-attachment are still very much relevant (although much more unlikely after white flag)
- Re-attachments with OTS must be possible without re-signing - just like now
- Re-attachments can be conflicts - just like now
- Terminology is (even in the current protocol) very confusing, it's crucial to clear this up before further discussions:
  - (try to change existing bundle/transactions names as less as possible)
  - Transaction (vertex in the Tangle) -> will be called "Message"
  - Bundle (transfer that is moving funds) -> will be called "Transaction" (to be consistent with UTxO names)
    - copies of the same "Transaction" can be in different "Messages" (re-attachment)
  - 0-value Transaction (a bundle transferring no funds) -> will just be a "Message" without a "Transaction"

More discussions are needed to clarify basics as this will speed up the writing of the RFC and help identify partitions.
