# Chrysalis RFC Call - 2020-06-09

## Participants

- Wolfgang
- Thibault
- Luca
- Gal
- Hans

## Action items

@all design a UTxO transaction layout proposal to be discussed and compared in the next week!

## Topics

### Communication

- Meeting notes will be uploaded under github.com/iotaledger/protocol-rfcs/tree/master in a separate folder
- Next call in the next week

### RFC Status

Chrysalis RFCs:
- [Draft RFC](https://hackmd.io/hldMvepaTpuKovr5-LdcZA) bytes->trytes: presented RFC, no open questions or objections, @wolfgang prepare PR, @all review
- [RFC-0001](https://github.com/iotaledger/protocol-rfcs/pull/1): @Gal address review comments
- [RFC-0005](https://github.com/iotaledger/protocol-rfcs/blob/master/text/0005-white-flag/0005-white-flag.md): discussed and approved changes in PR#14
- [RFC-0008](https://github.com/luca-moser/protocol-rfcs/blob/rfc-urts-tip-sel/text/0008-weighted-uniform-random-tip-selection/0008-weighted-uniform-random-tip-selection.md): discussed changes, approved by everyone
- [RFC-0012](https://github.com/Wollac/protocol-rfcs/blob/milestone-merkle-validation/text/0012-milestone-merkle-validation/0012-milestone-merkle-validation.md): requires minor changes to reference the Draft RFC (@Wolfgang), @all review after that

### UTxO (with a Coordinator)

```
                   input #1  >---*         *---> output #1 
                                 \        /
                   input #2  >---*--------* 
                                 /        \
                   input #3  >---*         *---> output #2
```

#### General

- Unless _every_ part of an transaction supports a version/type byte, there should be a version type in the Tx.

#### Inputs

- Signatures:
  - should not directly be part of the input, but in a separate "witness". This enables providing only one signature for all the inputs of the same address
  - only the actual transaction is signed not the "witness"

- Input types:
  - Allowing inputs of different types enables very fine granular control for each particular input
  - An input must uniquely reference a TxO. More information like value, meta data, etc is not required
  - There seems to be no realistic scenario which requires a different input type.
 
- Outputs:
  - One transaction should only have one output per address. This needs to be assured by a validation step.

- Input format:
   - There are two conceptually different design ideas:
      - `TxID` + `TxOutputIndex`
         - This is the most wide-spread input format in UTxO models.
         - It allows to reference any potential output types (even outputs not bound to an address).
         - Closer to the transaction memory model, in which the output is retrieved by an array access with the corresponding index.
      - `TxID` + `TxOutputAddress`
         - If only one output per address per transaction is allowed and only outputs to addresses are supported, this is equivalent to `TxID` + `TxOutputIndex`.
         - In a realistic DB model, (unspent) outputs should be addressable by `TxID` + `TxOutputAddress`. Thus, this format is closer to those DB keys.
