---
tip: 52
title: Multi Address
description: Defines an Address that is owned by multiple other addresses.
author:
  Eike Haß (@eike-hass ) <eike.hass@iota.org>, Max Hase (@muXxer) <maximilian.hase@iota.org>, Philipp Gackstatter
  (@PhilippGackstatter) <philipp.gackstatter@iota.org>
discussions-to: TODO
status: Draft
type: Standards
layer: Core
created: 2023-09-07
---

# Table of Contents

1. [Summary](#summary)
2. [Motivation](#motivation)
3. [Multi Address](#multi-address)
4. [Unlocks](#unlocks)
   - [Multi Unlock](#multi-unlock)
   - [Empty Unlock](#empty-unlock)
5. [Bech32 Representation](#bech32-representation)
6. [Rationale & Alternatives](#rationale--alternatives)
7. [Test Vectors](#test-vectors)
8. [Copyright](#copyright)

# Summary

This TIP proposes a new Address type to allow multiple addresses to create complex multi-signature-like unlock
conditions for outputs. The address is considered unlocked as soon as the cumulative weight of all unlocked contained
addresses matches or exceeds the configured threshold, where each of the addresses has an assigned weight.

# Motivation

The current outputs in Stardust can be unlocked by single addresses, which does not allow outputs to be unlocked by
multiple different entities, except with Ed25519 Threshold Signatures. The latter allows to model multi-control
structures, but it is not transparent who the underlying controlling addresses are and in particular, they do not allow
different Account or NFT Addresses to control an output. The _Multi Address_ introduced in this TIP allows for any other
address type to control an output in a multi-control structure, in various configurations. The W3C DID Specification
distinguishes between [independent control](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#independent-control) and
[group control](https://www.w3.org/TR/did-core/#group-control) which is a useful definition in this context. With the
current approach only independent control can be modelled. Allowing for group control by multiple inspectable
controlling entities might be useful in the following scenarios:

- Modelling multiple W3C DID controllers.
- Transparent modelling of ownership over funds or assets of entities like organizations.
- Transparent modelling of committees for anchoring (e.g. L2)

A _Multi Address_ allows for use-cases like:

- Requiring a signature by a hardware security module (HSM) and a signature by one of two trusted devices through
  software to unlock.
- Requiring signatures of a supermajority of controlling parties each of which are an Account to unlock.
- Modelling a 1 of n control structure in addition to a single backup address that has full control.
- Allowing interested parties to inspect the conditions for unlocking, e.g. majority or supermajority.

# Multi Address

The following table shows the mapping from the address type of the **first byte** to the address type:

| Address       | Type Byte as `uint8` | Bech32 Encoded |
| ------------- | -------------------- | -------------- |
| Multi Address | 32                   | iota1**y**...  |

The following table shows the serialization of a _Restricted Address_:

<details>
  <summary>Multi Address</summary>
  <blockquote>Defines a Multi Address that consists of addresses with weights and a threshold value. The Multi Address can be unlocked if the cumulative weight of all unlocked addresses is equal to or exceeds the threshold.</blockquote>
</details>
<table>
  <tr>
    <td>
      <b>Name</b>
    </td>
    <td>
      <b>Type</b>
    </td>
    <td>
      <b>Description</b>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Address Type</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>Set to <strong>value 32</strong> to denote a <i>Multi Address</i>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Addresses Count</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>The number of addresses following.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td valign="top">Addresses <code>anyOf</code></td>
    <td colspan="2">
      <details>
        <summary>Weighted Address</summary>
        <blockquote>An Address with an assigned weight.</blockquote>
        <table>
          <tr>
            <td>
              <b>Name</b>
            </td>
            <td>
              <b>Type</b>
            </td>
            <td>
              <b>Description</b>
            </td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td valign="top">Address <code>oneOf</code></td>
            <td colspan="2">
              <details>
                <summary>Ed25519 Address</summary>
                <blockquote>An Address derived from an Ed25519 Public Key. Defined in <a href='../TIP-0038/tip-0038.md#ed25519-address'>TIP-38 (Ed25519 Address)</a>.</blockquote>
              </details>
              <details>
                <summary>Account Address</summary>
                <blockquote>An Address derived from an Account ID which can be unlocked by unlocking the corresponding Account. Defined in <a href='../TIP-0038/tip-0038.md#account-address'>TIP-38 (Account Address)</a>.</blockquote>
              </details>
              <details>
                <summary>NFT Address</summary>
                <blockquote>An Address derived from an NFT ID which can be unlocked by unlocking the corresponding NFT. Defined in <a href='../TIP-0038/tip-0038.md#nft-address'>TIP-38 (NFT Address)</a>.</blockquote>
              </details>
            </td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>Weight</td>
            <td>uint8</td>
            <td>The weight of the unlocked address.</td>
          </tr>
        </table>
      </details>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Threshold</td>
    <td>uint16</td>
    <td>The threshold that needs to be reached by the unlocked addresses in order to unlock the Multi Address.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

A _Multi Address_ is a container for other addresses. Each address has weight and the Multi Address contains a threshold
`Threshold` that needs to be reached by the unlocked addresses in order to unlock the Multi Address.

## Additional syntactic transaction validation rules

A Multi Address is only valid if all of the following conditions hold:

- `1 <= Addresses Count <= 10`.
- The addresses must be lexically ordered and unique based on the contained serialized address.
- `Weight >= 1`, for each `Weight` of contained `Addresses`.
- `Cumulative Weight >= Threshold`, where `Cumulative Weight` is the sum of weight of all `Weight`s in `Addresses`.
- `Threshold >= 1`.

## Unlocks

### Multi Unlock

<details>
  <summary>Multi Unlock</summary>
  <blockquote>Unlocks a Multi Address with a list of other unlocks.</blockquote>
</details>
<table>
  <tr>
    <td>
      <b>Name</b>
    </td>
    <td>
      <b>Type</b>
    </td>
    <td>
      <b>Description</b>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Unlock Type</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>Set to <strong>value 4</strong> to denote a <i>Multi Unlock</i>.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Unlocks Count</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>The number of unlocks following.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td valign="top">Unlocks <code>anyOf</code></td>
    <td colspan="2">
      <details>
        <summary>Signature Unlock</summary>
        <blockquote>Unlocks the address derived from the contained Public Key in the transaction in which it is contained in. Defined in <a href='../TIP-0045/tip-0045.md#signature-unlock'>TIP-45 (Signature Unlock)</a>.</blockquote>
      </details>
      <details>
        <summary>Reference Unlock</summary>
        <blockquote>References a previous unlock to support unlocking multiple inputs owned by the same address. Defined in <a href='../TIP-0045/tip-0045.md#reference-unlock'>TIP-45 (Reference Unlock)</a>.</blockquote>
      </details>
      <details>
        <summary>Account Unlock</summary>
        <blockquote>Points to the unlock of a consumed Account Output. Defined in <a href='../TIP-0045/tip-0045.md#account-unlock'>TIP-45 (Account Unlock)</a>.</blockquote>
      </details>
      <details>
        <summary>NFT Unlock</summary>
        <blockquote>Points to the unlock of a consumed NFT Output. Defined in <a href='../TIP-0045/tip-0045.md#nft-unlock'>TIP-45 (NFT Unlock)</a>.</blockquote>
      </details>
      <details>
        <summary>Empty Unlock</summary>
        <blockquote>Used to maintain correct index relationship between addresses and signatures when unlocking a Multi Address where not all addresses are unlocked. Defined in <a href='../TIP-0052/tip-0052.md#empty-unlock'>TIP-52 (Empty Unlock)</a>.</blockquote>
      </details>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

#### Additional syntactic transaction validation rules

A Multi Unlock is only valid if all of the following conditions hold:

- `1 <= Unlocks Count <= 10`.

#### Additional semantic transaction validation rules

A transaction containing a Multi Unlock is only valid if all of the following conditions hold:

- The corresponding Address of the to-be-unlocked input is of type _Multi Address_.
- The `Addresses Count` of the Multi Address and the `Unlocks Count` of the Multi Unlock must match.
- If `Unlocks` contains Reference, Account or NFT Unlocks, they must point to an Unlock outside of the Multi Unlock.
- Let the `Cumulative Unlocked Weight` be the sum of weights of the addresses that were successfully unlocked, through
  Unlocks other than _Empty Unlocks_, which do not add to this sum.
- `Cumulative Unlocked Weight >= Threshold`.

### Empty Unlock

The indices of _Unlocks_ and `Addresses` in a Multi Address must match when unlocking it since it may be configured to
be unlocked by less than the number of addresses it contains. In such cases, the Empty Unlock needs to be used to
maintain correct index relationship between unlocks and addresses in a _Multi Unlock_, to omit the unlocks of the
addresses that are not unlocked.

For example, consider a Multi Address with 3 addresses with weight 1 and a threshold of 1. The Multi Address can be
unlocked by providing a Multi Unlock with a Signature Unlock of the first address and two subsequent Empty Unlocks.

<details>
  <summary>Empty Unlock</summary>
  <blockquote>Used to maintain correct index relationship between addresses and signatures when unlocking a Multi Address where not all addresses are unlocked.</blockquote>
</details>
<table>
  <tr>
    <td>
      <b>Name</b>
    </td>
    <td>
      <b>Type</b>
    </td>
    <td>
      <b>Description</b>
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Unlock Type</td>
    <td>uint8</td>
    <td>Set to <strong>value 5</strong> to denote an <i>Empty Unlock</i>.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

## Bech32 Representation

To allow querying the outputs owned by a Multi Address, its Bech32 representation is used, which is computed as follows:

- Let `Address Hash` be the BLAKE2b-256 hash of the serialized Multi Address.
- Bech32-encode the concatenation of the Multi Address type prefix and the `Address Hash`.

# Rationale & Alternatives

Multi Addresses make transparent which other entities control an entity, since they are specified in the address itself.
For a Digital Identity this allows for inspection of which other identities control it and expresses the relationship of
L1 entities. Additionally Multi Addresses enhance the security and recoverability of Accounts by adding support for
multi-factor authentication (e.g. two addresses with weight 1 and a threshold of 2) or backup addresses (e.g. same as
before plus an address with weight 2 whose private key is in cold storage) for outputs on L1.

**Alternatives**

- One alternative would be to have two sets of addresses, where one lists the mandatory and one the optional addresses,
  the latter of which contains weights and a threshold. While this allows for similar use cases, it is harder to
  validate correctness while not being more expressive.
- Rather than introducing Multi Address as an additional type, it would be possible to introduce it as the only type of
  address, as it could express all other existing types. However, that exposes every protocol user to the complexity of
  Multi Addresses, which may not be desirable. Introducing it as a dedicated type confines the complexity to a smaller
  part of the user-facing surface, while still allowing for the same functionality as if it was the only top-level
  address type.
- Another alternative is to simplify towards k of n use cases, avoiding the complexity of weights. This excludes some
  use cases and a weight-based approach is not significantly more complex than a k of n only approach, which can already
  be achieved with Ed25519 Threshold signatures.

# Test Vectors

## Bech32

```json
{
  "type": 32,
  "addresses": [
    {
      "address": {
        "type": 0,
        "pubKeyHash": "0x52fdfc072182654f163f5f0f9a621d729566c74d10037c4d7bbb0407d1e2c649"
      },
      "weight": 1
    },
    {
      "address": {
        "type": 0,
        "pubKeyHash": "0x53fdfc072182654f163f5f0f9a621d729566c74d10037c4d7bbb0407d1e2c649"
      },
      "weight": 1
    },
    {
      "address": {
        "type": 0,
        "pubKeyHash": "0x54fdfc072182654f163f5f0f9a621d729566c74d10037c4d7bbb0407d1e2c649"
      },
      "weight": 1
    },
    {
      "address": {
        "type": 8,
        "accountId": "0x55fdfc072182654f163f5f0f9a621d729566c74d10037c4d7bbb0407d1e2c649"
      },
      "weight": 2
    },
    {
      "address": {
        "type": 16,
        "nftId": "0x56fdfc072182654f163f5f0f9a621d729566c74d10037c4d7bbb0407d1e2c649"
      },
      "weight": 3
    }
  ],
  "threshold": 2
}
```

The resulting Bech32 representation must be:

```
iota1yz4qe5j4s44a7qpnz4lkd0nuepc9xkchznae90gy78ht8m9g9epxw6wqhtm
```

# Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).
